---
title: The Connection between Circumcision and Baptism
tags: religion

date: '2020-04-20'
---

The connection between circumcision and baptism is twofold; first, both are signs of initiation; second, both are signs of the righteousness in Christ which justifies sinners (Romans 4:11). Granted this connection, the greater controversy is whether or not these substantially equivalent signs are to be administered in the same pattern. Our position and hermeneutic is that existing norms are not abrogated without explicit, inscripturated, apostolic teaching. With B.B. Warfield, then, we give a concise, biblical warrant for infant initiation:

> God established his Church in the days of Abraham and put children into it. They must remain there until He puts them out. He has nowhere put them out.

Here are a few practical reasons why this matters:

1. **Instruction**

Infant initiation through baptism instructs our children — and us who witness these baptisms — of perhaps the cardinal insight of the Bible in relation to our salvation — grace precedes faith. We are not saved because we believe, but we believe because we’ve been saved by Christ and given the gift of faith. (Ephesians 2) By infant initiation, this vital grammar of salvation is preserved for our children rather than distorted by requiring of them some spiritual-experience prior to public acceptance as Christians. This instruction applies not only to our children but supremely to us. Our baptisms (whether they were adult or infant) are not self-referential religious rite giving expression to our faith in God (making it an occasion for boasting) but it is an expression of God’s eternal promise, applied to us, to cleanse sinners in the blood of his Son (which requires just a sprinkle of blood — as the high priest would apply to the mercy seat — because of the potency of the blood!). When we see the water we dare not think of ourselves and our works or even our faith. We scorn the notion that our faith has any merit, and we think of the wisdom and love of God in the sending of the Savior. Thanks be to God for the blood of Christ! Even the weakest faith is far above the powers of human nature and is a gift of God. Infant initiation especially attests to this doctrine to those who are learning it from their earliest days, from the authority figures of their own parents who love them dearly. This is in fact designed to be the norm for how the christian faith is taught and received. Those who come into the Church from the outside as adults are in a totally different category of experience relative to Christ and the Church. And once they do so, their salvation is of such great consequence it will dramatically change their children’s relationship with God and ordinarily, normally, we expect that this convert’s children will be saved to the thousandth generation. (Exodus 20:6) This is God’s plan of salvation.

2. **Charity**

When someone is a Christian, our debt of love to them is greater, as they are not just our neighbors but we are united to them as our brothers and sisters in Christ. This obviously applies to our children. Of course we love them and care for them, but infant initiation leads us to love them with the dearest of all loves. With respect to the genuineness of their salvation, this is entirely in God’s Hands and we are instructed to err on the side of charity toward their confession of faith which they will make as growing children. This is in keeping with the biblical principle of prudence. We don’t assume the worst of others, but instead we deliberately assume the best. Too often, this principle of prudence regarding the spiritual state of others is unused and we sinfully apply the doctrine of sin to assume the worst of others, even, sadly, to our own children and spouses. This especially applies to those of us with good theology that confess total depravity. What a miserable application of God’s Word! Infant initiation tirelessly opposes this ungodly application of doctrine in God’s Word with our children, and sets a precedent for how we are to treat others as well in the same spirit of charity with a healthy dose of prudence regarding their walk with Christ.

3. **Humility**

When we see flaws in someone’s confession of faith (and if we spend 30 seconds in the Church we do!); for instance, theological error, glaring character defects etc… we are instructed to confess with Christ that we all fall short in many ways and the other’s sin becomes an occasion for the humbling ourselves. We also remind ourselves that our standing with God does not depend on ourselves or even the strength or quality of our faith, but rather the character of God. What’s more, we often judge ourselves on a curve. Perhaps I may be more theologically mature than others, but I’m pretty sure I’ll never be as mature as some covenant children or many others who are stuck in theological error but abound in spiritual fruit. So this applies even more strongly with children — while they do not understand their salvation as we do, have the kind of valuable spiritual insight and experience, they are yet worthy of imitation in many ways **as christians**. Excluding them and treating them as outsiders blinds us to the force of this reality which ought to apply most strongly in the home and in the family.

These are just a few benefits to infant initiation via baptism. Many more could be enumerated.
