---
title: Letter to Jacob
tags: private
#
date: '2020-06-20'
---

# Racial Reconciliation

First, what I want to address is what many fail to recognize as an appropriate question for an economist: **Why do financial disparities exist and seem to run along racial lines?** Many carry on as if there were no specialists who’ve dedicated their lives to adequately address the complexities of this question. They take it for granted that such disparities are (a) always unnatural, (b) de-facto attributable to injustice and (c) therefore constitute obvious evidence of systemic oppression. Very intelligent people rush to these conclusions without consulting intelligent dissenting voices — like academic economists. To name two intelligent dissenting voices within this historic discipline, Dr. Walter E. Williams and Dr. Thomas Sowell are conservative, black economists, who have each responded to this very question with book length discourses containing hard statistical data justifying their conclusions. These are men who lived through Jim Crow and are yet dissenting against this notion of perpetual systemic injustice along racial lines in the USA. That they are themselves black excludes them from ad-homenim attacks of a certain variety, but of course leaves them vulnerable to another sort, which are sinfully leveled against them as if that dismisses the substantial hard evidence and thoughtfulness of their conclusions. Perhaps we do not agree with their conclusions, but they certainly ought to make room for us to have a dialogue without dismissing their view as racist on its face.

Second, the evidence for disproportionate lethal force against black men is disputable. If anything is systemically corrupt in our country, in my observation, it is our press. Anecdotal evidence of police brutality against blacks in the form of horrific viral videos stirs our emotions but cannot be a substitute for adequate statistical evidence that we have a systemic problem and black men ought to fear for their lives. What videos are we not seeing? If a white man dies at the hands of police, do we hear about it? In fact, in the confrontation between a black man and a police officer, the evidence may suggest the man in blue is in greater risk. Black men commit a disproportionate amount of violent crime. Citations that 2x (or more) more blacks are killed by police than whites fails to take into consideration the moral complexities of such confrontations and constitutes another example of data being interpreted in any way one desires. For instance, were these men armed? In other words, was it a legitimate use of police force? I’ve read a competing statistic that in 2019, 19 unarmed whites were shot by police (not just killed, but shot) compared to 9 blacks. Certainly this statistic could be disputed, but it is not given much air time. This is telling. This anecdotal evidence, in the form of viral videos, seem to serve the purpose of confirming a pre-existing narrative which leads to votes for politicians. Booker T Washington acknowledged as much when he said:

> There is a class of colored people who make a business of keeping the troubles, the wrongs, and the hardships of the Negro race before the public. Having learned that they are able to make a living out of their troubles, they have grown into the settled habit of advertising their wrongs-partly because they want sympathy and partly because it pays. Some of these people do not want the Negro to lose his grievances, because they do not want to lose their jobs… .. There is a certain class of race-problem solvers who don’t want the patient to get well.”

Many people oppose this narrative, not because they are racist, but because it represents a political agenda they oppose. This agenda assumes the premise that blacks are unable to attain success in America without white intervention. This notion is something many harbor as a noble intent, yet nonetheless it appears to some as a manifestation of their own self-importance. Proclaiming oneself as “anti-racist” or a “white-ally” does little but point the finger at other whites who perhaps simply see the proposed political solutions behind this narrative to be inefficient in realizing their intent — even if the narrative itself is conceded! Equating intent with outcomes is the basic flaw of much political contempt; the question is not “what is your intent” (ie or, are you anti-racist?) but what hard evidence do you have that the desired outcome will be realized under a given policy?

Third, what constitutes systemic racism is not immediately evident. If we say that it means racism exists all across our country, affecting those in power, and brings fruits of injustice throughout every realm of our society, I would agree. The trouble with defining systemic racism as the cumulative effect of racist individuals — which may even be latent within the very fabric of one’s culture — is that law cannot serve as a solution to this problem. We cannot legislate against thoughts (ie unconscious or implicit bias) or ways of life which never manifest in explicitly discriminatory behavior. Systemic racism is best defined as laws which are intentionally made to disenfranchise certain populations along racial lines. This is what I understand to be the historic measure, which the USA was indisiputably and shamefully guilty of for centuries. After much bloodshed and legislation, we have made progress to a point where I do not know of a law that intentionally discriminates against any population, along racial lines, in our country. There may be disproportionate effects of a law within a given community, but this falls short of our definition (ie the welfare state, prison populations from drug laws etc…). With this definition in place, our country seems to be guilty of racism in the form of affirmative action which actually discriminates against all races who are not black. This however constitutes a positive effort by our legislator to undo the effects of previous law that undeniably and intentionally victimized the black population in our country.

Does the irradiation of systemic racism, under this definition, mean there are no racial problems? No. It simply means laws are in place in this country which aim to give and protect equal opportunity among all, regardless of race. This is why people come to our country from all over the world. If the USA was a place of deeply corrupt, systemic racism, why is the world rushing to get here? We live in the least racist country in the world. There is no greater population on earth with the vast diversity and general harmony as exists in the USA. This something of which we should be proud. And it has come through just law and coherent political philosophy based on the equality of all in the sight of God.

Fourth, the ideology of implicit bias and white fragility constitute a gross transgression of the 9th commandment and the dignity of white culture. We are to honor one another and hold one another up. As missionaries to foreign worlds, for instance, we recognize sin in other cultures but we do not make that sin definitional of their way of life and culture. To do this is to transgress the 5th commandment as well, which holds those who came before us in contempt. The conviction and mortification of secret sin is the work of the Holy Spirit upon the heart of an individual through the very word of God. In God’s wisdom, he has taught us to make charitable assumptions of others and even protect their good name. Doing the opposite is a violation of God’s law, and a very common contemporary sin. Christians who grasp the doctrine of sin are perhaps the most inclined toward this nonsense. It is a twisted application of this doctrine to assert that we ought to assume we know that the hearts of others are always and only full of darkness and sin! The very opposite is required by God’s Law, and in God’s mysterious providence, the very opposite may be true even of unbelievers around us.

Lastly, as it concerns a coherent theology on these matters, we should know two things: (1) the gospel is not the answer to every problem articulated by our world and (2) the gospel cannot save the world. Instead, the gospel witnesses to the impending doom of this current evil age, this world, whose god is the devil, and testifies to another world which has already begun and is ever breaking into our own through the ministry of Jesus Christ in his Church. It will never be consummated but by Christ himself on the last day. Moses, David, Abraham, Jacob, Isaac and all the rest who’ve gone before us are in heaven begging for the dawn of that day to come. But it is not yet. Until then, the Law is in actuality what we need to grasp more fully to make progress as far as temporal matters are concerned. The Law in its second use is understood to bring blessing and grace to this present evil age outside of the Church by (a) punishing those who do evil and (b) blessing those who do good. When the law is administered rightly, it holds forth not only the curse of the covenant of works (1st use), but the promise that those who obey will be blessed and “live long in the land” and those who disobey will perish (2nd use). There is blessing in God’s Law. We should punish those who transgress, and bless those who obey. That is the job of the magistrate, to administer the law with righteousness, equity, and justice. This is not the job of the Church, but the State. It is essential, complex, and difficult. We need Christians who are not antinomian, who care about social justice as it were, but do not conflate this with the mission or role of the Church or even explicitly religious devotion. Those who make these matters “a gospel issue” do not understand that cultural renewal is beyond the scope of the competency and ministerial authority of the Church. That is not to say it is beyond the work of God! Far from it. God is working in both spheres, but with very different instruments and purposes; in the Church, he gently uses shepherds of the word, water, bread, wine, and our prayers; in the world, he uses a blood soaked sword and dashes the nations as clay pots with a rod of iron.

The thing that has upset me the most about these times is Christians who make their witness tantamount to finger pointing. It is the definition of hypocrisy to make our calling as christians pointing out the sin of others. The reformed church is guilty of this in a different manner than SJW’s, but it is just as putrid and vile in the sight of God. Our hearts must not be filled with contempt for arminians, charismatics, nor with those who disagree with our political emphases and convictions! It was the tax collector who walked away from the temple justified, not the pharisee (I thank you God I am not like other men). Yes, the Word of God rebukes us in our sin, yes it calls out the darkness of this world for what it is — hideous darkness — but that is the violent work of God’s Spirit, and we ought to tremble before the God who does this — not just to the other — but to us! And not only before we are Christians, but now, even this very day — yes, even to our dying day! And we confess he who wields this sword is a merciful, gracious God. This same word which undoes us and will undo all creation also vivifies. It gives us undeserving sinners life. Therefore, with this life we’ve been given, we are called to live as though we have logs in our eyes and the rest of the world has specs in comparison. We are to “beware of the leaven of the Pharisees” by living in obedience to the 9th commandment — by speaking well of others, being gracious to them, even covering their sin, and protecting their good name. Yes we ought to raise our voice for the oppressed. We weep with them, we pray with them. But we do it without self-righteousness and contempt in our hearts. Otherwise, it is leaven that ruins the whole lump and is a disgrace to God and even our prayer is counted as sin against us.

In these difficult times, may the LORD be gracious to us and keep us from anger.
